*
ALL ROCKS HAVE
STORIES TO TELL.
MINERALS MAKE UP ROCKS.
THERE'S A LOT OF MINERALS
THAT ARE USED IN ECONOMY
OR INDUSTRY.
GOLD, SILVER, LEAD, ZINC...
THERE ARE ALSO SOME
VERY BEAUTIFUL ROCKS.
I LOVE BEAUTIFUL MINERALS.
ROCKS TELL AN
INCREDIBLE STORY.
THEY TELL THE STORY OF
THE HISTORY OF THE PLANET
OVER THE LAST SEVERAL
BILLION YEARS.
THE EARTH IS MADE OF ROCK,
FROM THE TALLEST MOUNTAINS
TO THE FLOOR OF
THE DEEPEST OCEAN.
GEOLOGISTS STUDY THE ROCKS
TO LEARN ABOUT OUR PLANET
AND THE VARIOUS
PROCESSES AND EVENTS
THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE.
SCIENTISTS READ ROCKS
BECAUSE ROCKS TELL US
THE HISTORY
OF THE EARTH.
THEY KIND OF RECORD THE
EVENTS OF THE EARTH,
WHAT'S HAPPENED OVER
GEOLOGICAL TIME.
THAT'S THE GREAT THING
ABOUT GEOLOGY IS THAT
THESE MOMENTS ARE
RECORDED IN ROCK.
YOU CAN SEE DROPLETS
OF RAIN AND YOU CAN SEE
DINOSAUR FOOTPRINTS
IN THE ROCK
WHICH IS JUST
FASCINATING.
IT'S MORE THAN JUST
RECORDING FOSSILS,
IT RECORDS
MOMENTS IN TIME.
BUT BEFORE WE CAN UNDERSTAND
ANYTHING ABOUT ROCKS
WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT MINERALS ARE.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
ROCKS AND MINERALS
IS THAT MINERALS
MAKE UP ROCKS.
THEY'RE ESSENTIALLY THE
BUILDING BLOCKS OF ROCKS.
SO THE SAME WAY THAT,
SAY, THERE'S A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A POTATO
AND A STEW, RIGHT?
BECAUSE A STEW IS MADE UP OF
ALL THESE DIFFERENT THINGS
- VEGETABLES AND
BROTH AND POTATOES -
IN THE SAME WAY THAT'S
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
MINERALS AND ROCKS.
ROCKS ARE MADE UP OF
DIFFERENT KINDS OF MINERALS.
MANY PEOPLE ARE USED TO
HEARING THE WORD "MINERAL"
ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR
JAR OF DAILY VITAMINS.
THOSE ARE NOT MINERALS,
THOSE ARE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS.
WHILE ROCKS ARE MADE OF
MINERALS, MINERALS ARE
MADE OF CHEMICAL ELEMENTS
- ESSENTIALLY ATOMS
SUCH AS CARBON,
IRON, OR CALCIUM.
CURRENTLY WE KNOW OF
AT LEAST 113 ELEMENTS
AND AT LEAST 92 OF THESE ARE
NATURALLY OCCURRING ON EARTH.
MANY ARE VALUABLE
RESOURCES.
IT'S VERY INTERESTING WHEN
YOU LOOK AT ALL OF THE
RESOURCES THAT WE USE
IN EVERYDAY LIFE,
THEY'RE MOSTLY MADE UP OF
THE ELEMENTS THAT ARE IN
VERY MINOR ABUNDANCES,
LIKE THE GOLD IN MY RING
OR ANY OF THE
METALS THAT WE USE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU
HAVE A RACING BIKE
IT'S MADE OUT OF
A TITANIUM ALLOY.
THESE ARE ALL ELEMENTS
THAT ARE PRESENT IN VERY
TINY ABUNDANCES AND THERE
ARE VARIOUS DIFFERENT
PROCESSES ON EARTH THAT
HAVE CONCENTRATED THOSE
ELEMENTS LOCALLY, BUT IF YOU
LOOK AT THE ENTIRE PLANET
IT'S REALLY JUST A FEW
ELEMENTS THAT MAKE UP
MOST OF OUR GLOBE.
AS THE EARTH FORMED, MANY
OF THE HEAVIER ELEMENTS
SUCH AS IRON AND NICKEL
WERE DRAWN TO THE CENTER
WHILE LIGHTER ELEMENTS
FLOATED TO THE TOP
TO FORM THE CRUST.
THE CRUST IS MADE UP OF
MAINLY EIGHT ELEMENTS:
IF WE LOOK AT THE
ELEMENTS THAT MAKE UP
THE EARTH'S CRUST THERE'S
REALLY ONLY EIGHT ELEMENTS
OF THE 92 NATURALLY
OCCURRING ELEMENTS
THAT MAKE UP
THE EARTH'S CRUST.
THE TWO MOST ABUNDANT THAT
MAKE UP ROUGHLY ABOUT 75%
ARE OXYGEN BEING THE MOST
ABUNDANT AT ABOUT 46%
AND SILICA.
BECAUSE THOSE TWO
ELEMENTS ARE THE
DOMINANT COMPONENTS
OF THE EARTH'S CRUST,
LOGICALLY THEY MAKE UP
THE BUILDING BLOCKS
FOR ABOUT 95% OF THE
MINERALS WE FIND
IN THE EARTH'S CRUST - IN
THE ROCK-FORMING MINERALS.
ROCK-FORMING MINERALS THAT
CONTAIN OXYGEN AND SILICA
ARE CALLED "SILICATES".
MOST MINERALS ARE
USUALLY A COMBINATION OF
TWO OR MORE ELEMENTS
AND ARE REPRESENTED BY
THE CHEMICAL SYMBOL OF
THE COMBINED ELEMENTS.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, THIS IS A
CRYSTAL OF THE MINERAL QUARTZ.
IT'S ONE SINGLE
GRAIN OF QUARTZ.
QUARTZ IS A MINERAL, IT HAS
A FIXED CHEMICAL FORMULA
- SIO2 -
SILICON DIOXIDE.
EACH OF THE SILICATE
MINERALS CONTAINS
OXYGEN AND SILICON
AND PERHAPS
ONE OR MORE
ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS.
AND THEY MAKE UP
THREE-FOURTHS
OF THE EARTH'S
CONTINENTAL CRUST.
HOWEVER, THERE ARE ALSO
NON-SILICATE GROUPS
AND WHILE THEY MAKE UP
ONLY ONE-FOURTH OF THE
CONTINENTAL CRUST, THESE
MINERALS ARE USED IN MANY
IMPORTANT WAYS FROM BUILDING
MATERIALS LIKE CEMENT
AND DRYWALL TO ELECTRICAL
CONDUCTORS AND STEEL.
SOME OF THE NON-SILICATE
MINERAL GROUPS INCLUDE:
CARBONATES INCLUDE
MINERALS LIKE CALCITE,
ALSO KNOWN AS CALCIUM
CARBONATE WHICH IS A MAJOR
COMPONENT IN ROCKS LIKE
MARBLE AND LIMESTONE.
IT IS ALSO THE PRIMARY
MINERAL IN CAVE FORMATIONS.
THERE ARE SOME
MINERAL-TYPE DEPOSITS
THAT ARE MORE
COMMON IN CAVES -
YOUR STALACTITES
AND STALAGMITES.
THAT'S BASICALLY
CALCIUM CARBONATE
BUT THAT'S WHAT REEF
ROCK IS MADE OUT OF.
ALL YOUR LIMESTONE,
THAT'S CALCIUM CARBONATE.
WHEN YOU GO TO PLACES LIKE
YELLOWSTONE AND YOU SEE
ALL THE TRAVERTINE
DEPOSITS COMING OUT OF THE
HOT SPRINGS, MOST OF THAT
IS ALSO CALCIUM CARBONATE.
SO THEY TAKE DIFFERENT
FORMS BUT YOU'RE STILL
RESTRICTED BY THE
SAME SET OF MINERALS.
SULFATES INCLUDING GYPSUM
CAN ALSO BE SEEN BEST
UNDERGROUND WHERE
THEY CAN TAKE ON
RARE AND UNUSUAL
FORMATIONS.
YOU DO SEE SOME MORE
ODDBALL THINGS LIKE
THE GIANT GYPSUM
CHANDELIERS.
ESSENTIALLY THEY'RE
BIG CELANITE NEEDLES
AND THERE'S VERY FEW
PLACES, PARTICULARLY ON
THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH,
THAT YOU SEE THAT BECAUSE
CELANITE, WHICH IS MADE UP
OF THE SAME STUFF AS GYPSUM,
THE CALCIUM SULFATE,
IS EXTREMELY SOLUBLE.
THIS IS THE SAME STUFF THAT
THEY MAKE DRYWALL OUT OF.
IT'S VERY, VERY SOLUBLE
IN WATER SO ON THE SURFACE
WHERE YOU'VE GOT RAIN
YOU JUST DON'T SEE IT.
BUT UNDERGROUND WHERE
YOU'RE ACTUALLY PROTECTED
BY ALL THOSE LAYERS OF
ROCK YOU CAN ACTUALLY SEE
LARGE DISPLAYS OF VERY BIG
CRYSTALS AND THERE'S VERY
FEW PLACES IN THE WORLD
THAT YOU CAN ACTUALLY
SEE THOSE PRESERVED,
WHERE YOU CAN ACTUALLY
WALK BY AND
TAKE A LOOK.
OTHER NON-SILICATE
MINERALS INCLUDE
HALIDES SUCH AS SALT,
OXIDES LIKE ICE AND IRON,
AND SULFIDES SUCH
AS ORE OF COPPER.
AS WELL AS NATIVE
ELEMENTS WHICH ARE
CALLED "PURE" ELEMENTS
BECAUSE THEY ARE MADE
FROM ONLY ONE ELEMENT
SUCH AS GOLD AND DIAMONDS.
A MINERAL BY DEFINITION
MUST SATISFY FIVE CONDITIONS:
SO IF WE TAKE THAT SORT
OF TEXTBOOK DEFINITION AND
BREAK IT DOWN A LITTLE
BIT, A MINERAL HAS TO BE
NATURALLY OCCURRING, SO IT
CAN'T BE A MAN-MADE THING
LIKE CUBIC ZIRCONIUM OR
AN INDUSTRIAL DIAMOND
OR INDUSTRIAL RUBY.
IT HAS TO BE
SOMETHING THAT'S
ACTUALLY MADE
BY THE EARTH.
TO BE INORGANIC MEANS
THAT IT WAS NEVER ALIVE
AND CANNOT BE MADE FROM
PLANT OR ANIMAL MATERIAL.
SO, IF YOU FOUND A SHELL
- A SHELL IS NOT A ROCK
BECAUSE IT'S
MADE ORGANICALLY,
BUT THE CONSTITUENTS OF THAT
SHELL - CALCIUM CARBONATE,
THE CALCIUM CARBONATE
MINERAL, CALCITE -
THAT IS A MINERAL
BUT THE SHELL ITSELF
ISN'T A MINERAL.
THEY MUST BE A SOLID
ELEMENT OR COMPOUND
SO LIQUIDS
ARE NOT MINERALS.
THEY MUST HAVE A
DEFINITE COMPOSITION,
MEANING THE CHEMICAL
ANALYSIS OF A GIVEN MINERAL
WILL ALWAYS PRODUCE THE
SAME RATIO OF ELEMENTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, QUARTZ
WILL ALWAYS HAVE
ONE SILICON ATOM FOR
EVERY TWO OXYGEN ATOMS.
IT HAS TO HAVE A DEFINITE
SET OF PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES.
IT CAN'T VARY IN ITS
CHEMISTRY TOO MUCH.
MINERALS ARE IN ESSENCE
JUST CHEMICALS
BUT THEY'RE
CRYSTALLINE CHEMICALS.
THEY MUST HAVE A REGULAR
INTERNAL CRYSTAL STRUCTURE
WHICH MEANS THE ATOMS
ARE ARRANGED IN A
CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE
IN A REPEATING PATTERN.
MINERALS ALSO HAVE
CERTAIN PROPERTIES
THAT HELP US
CLARIFY THEM.
WE CLASSIFY THEM IN
TERMS OF THINGS LIKE
THEIR HARDNESS, HOW THEY
BREAK WHICH IS CALLED
THEIR CLEAVAGE, WHETHER
THEY LEAVE A STREAK
OF A DIFFERENT COLOR IF
YOU TRY TO WRITE WITH THEM
ON A PIECE OF
WHITE CERAMIC.
AND ALL OF THESE DIFFERENT
PROPERTIES THAT WE USE
TO CLASSIFY THEM ARE
REALLY TELLING US ABOUT
THE CRYSTALLINE ARRANGEMENT
OF ALL OF THOSE ATOMS.
CRYSTAL FORM REFERS TO THE
INTERNAL ORDERLY ARRANGEMENTS
OF ATOMS, BUT ALSO GENERALLY
RESULTS IN A CRYSTAL
WITH WELL-FORMED FACES,
LIKE IN THIS QUARTZ GRAIN.
THESE GREW NATURALLY.
THIS IS NOT SOMETHING ANYBODY
CUT WITH A SAW, FOR EXAMPLE.
AND THE CRYSTAL FACES
TELL US SOMETHING ABOUT
THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE
SILICON AND OXYGEN ATOMS
IN THE CRYSTAL LATTICE
FOR THE MINERAL QUARTZ.
THE STANDARD SCALE FOR
HARDNESS WAS DEVELOPED
BY FRIEDRICH MOHS IN 1812
AND REALLY REFLECTS
THE STRENGTH OF WHAT ARE
CALLED COVALENT BONDS -
THE CHEMICAL LINK BETWEEN
ATOMS AND THE MINERAL.
THE STANDARD MINERALS
MAKING UP THE MOHS SCALE
OF HARDNESS ARE FROM THE
SOFTEST, TALC, TO THE
HARDEST, DIAMOND, WHICH IS
THE HARDEST MINERAL ON EARTH
BECAUSE OF THE BONDS
BETWEEN THE CARBON ATOMS.
EVERY CARBON ATOM IS VERY
TIGHTLY BONDED TO EVERY
OTHER CARBON ATOM BY WHAT
ARE CALLED COVALENT BONDS.
AND IT TAKES AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF ENERGY
TO BREAK THOSE
COVALENT BONDS.
AND BECAUSE EVERY CARBON
IS CONNECTED TO EVERY
OTHER ONE BY COVALENT
BONDS IT GIVES THE MINERAL
ITS INCREDIBLE
HARDNESS AND STRENGTH
THAT YOU JUST CANNOT BREAK
THOSE BONDS VERY READILY.
BECAUSE BONDING IS NOT
ALWAYS OF EQUAL STRENGTH
IN MOST CRYSTALS, SOME
WILL TEND TO BREAK.
WHERE YOU HAVE A PLANE
OF WEAK BONDS YOU CAN
BREAK THAT MINERAL
VERY EASILY
AND HENCE IT HAS A
VERY GOOD CLEAVAGE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE MICAS
- BIOTITE OR MUSCOVITE -
MOST KIDS HAVE PROBABLY
PICKED UP A BOOK OF MICA
AND FOUND THEY CAN
PEEL THE SHEETS AWAY.
THE SHEETS THEMSELVES,
AGAIN THE BONDS ARE
VERY STRONG WITHIN A
SHEET, BUT EACH SHEET IS
HELD TO THE NEXT ONE BY
VERY, VERY WEAK BONDS
AND YOU CAN BREAK THEM
WITH YOUR FINGERS.
COLOR ALSO CAN BE HIGHLY
VARIABLE IN MINERALS
DEPENDING ON VARIOUS
IMPURITIES THAT MIGHT
GET INTO THE
CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE.
QUARTZ, FOR EXAMPLE,
CAN BE CLEAR AS GLASS
BUT IT CAN ALSO BE
PURPLE SUCH AS AMETHYST
WHICH YOU MIGHT
FIND IN A GEODE.
IT CAN BE BLACK,
IT CAN BE BROWN,
IT CAN BE ANY
VARIETY OF COLORS.
PINK IN ROSE QUARTZ, FOR
EXAMPLE, OR IT CAN BE
A DULL GRAY AS
IN SMOKY QUARTZ.
SO, MINERALS, DEPENDING
ON A DASH OF THIS AND A
SPRINKLING OF THAT, CAN
HAVE A VARIETY OF DIFFERENT
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND
DIFFERENT CHARACTERS.
STREAK, LUSTER, AS WELL AS
TASTE OR EVEN ELASTICITY
AND MAGNETISM, ARE ALL
HELPFUL PROPERTIES WHEN
IDENTIFYING THE DIFFERENT
AND OFTEN QUITE BEAUTIFUL
MINERALS AND
VALUABLE GEM STONES.
GEMS ARE SIMPLY MINERALS
THAT HAVE SOME SPECIAL
COMMERCIAL VALUE BECAUSE
OF THEIR GREAT BEAUTY AND
THE ABILITY TO WORK WITH
THEM AND CUT FACETS IN THEM
WHICH IS ENHANCED
BY THE ORIENTATION
OF THE CHEMICAL BONDING
IN THOSE MINERALS.
CERTAINLY SOME OF
THEM HAVE SOME VALUE
OTHER THAN JUST AS
THINGS OF BEAUTY.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE
COMPUTER CHIP INDUSTRY
AND SO ON AND FOR
MAKING SEMICONDUCTORS
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT AS GEM STONES REALLY
THEIR VALUE IS PURELY
HOW HUMANS PLACE VALUE
JUDGMENTS ON THEM.
A ROCK IS BASICALLY A
COMBINATION OF ONE OR MORE
MINERALS, BUT IT IS
MUCH MORE THAN THAT.
ROCKS CONTAIN INFORMATION
ABOUT THE EARTH,
ABOUT THE PROCESSES
THAT PRODUCE THEM
AND THE HISTORY
OF THE ENVIRONMENTS
THAT CHANGE THEM.
AND THERE ARE MANY, MANY
DIFFERENT TYPES OF ROCKS.
WHAT WE DO TO CLASSIFY
A ROCK IS LOOK AT ITS
MINERAL CONTENT, LOOK
AT WHAT TYPE OF MINERAL
IS IN IT AND HOW
MUCH OF IT IS IN IT
IN ORDER TO DETERMINE
WHAT KIND OF ROCK IT IS.
AND THE CHEMISTRY OF
THE MINERALS THEMSELVES
WILL DEPEND ON HOW
AND WHAT ENVIRONMENT
THEY WERE FORMED.
WHETHER IT WAS VOLCANIC,
WHETHER IT WAS SOMEWHERE
IN THE DEEP SEA WHERE THERE
WAS A LOT OF WATER INPUT
- THESE ARE ALL THINGS
THAT WILL DETERMINE
HOW THOSE ELEMENTS
WILL COME TOGETHER.
THERE ARE THREE
TYPES OF ROCKS.
ALL ROCKS CAN BE
CLASSIFIED IN THIS WAY.
WE HAVE IGNEOUS ROCKS,
SEDIMENTARY, AND METAMORPHIC.
IGNEOUS ARE LIKE
THE BIRTH OF A ROCK.
THEY'RE FORMED FROM MAGMA
WHICH IS LIQUID ROCK
THAT COOLS AND SOLIDIFIES
AND FORMS AN IGNEOUS ROCK.
AND THAT CAN HAPPEN
UNDERGROUND OR IT CAN HAPPEN
WHEN THEY ERUPT OUT OF
A VOLCANO AND FORM LAVA.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT IGNEOUS
ROCKS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
A GROUP OR FAMILY OF ROCKS
THAT CONTAIN MANY, MANY,
MANY DIFFERENT VARIETIES
OF IGNEOUS ROCK.
BUT THERE'S
TWO MAIN GROUPS
WE CAN LUMP
IGNEOUS ROCKS INTO.
WE HAVE WHAT ARE CALLED
EXTRUSIVE OR VOLCANIC
IGNEOUS ROCKS, AND THESE
ARE IGNEOUS ROCKS THAT FORM
AS A RESULT OF LAVA
BEING EXTRUDED ON THE
EARTH'S SURFACE AND
COOLING AND CRYSTALLIZING
VERY RAPIDLY ON THE
EARTH'S SURFACE.
AND SO WHAT HAPPENS
IS THAT THESE MELTS
WHEN THEY ERUPT
FROM A VOLCANIC VENT
THEY'RE SO STICKY THEY
CAN'T REALLY FLOW ANYWHERE
AND THEY'RE SO VISCOUS
THAT ALL OF THE
CHEMICAL ATOMS IN THEM
FORM INTO MOLECULES
AND GET TANGLED UP
WITH EACH OTHER
AND THEY CAN'T MAKE NICE
CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURES.
AND SO IT JUST QUENCHES
AS IS, AS A GLASS.
IGNEOUS ROCKS THAT COOL
AND CRYSTALLIZE VERY SLOWLY
WITHIN THE CRUST OF THE
EARTH ARE CALLED INTRUSIVE
OR PLUTONIC IGNEOUS
ROCKS AND AN EXAMPLE
OF AN INTRUSIVE IGNEOUS
ROCK WOULD BE GRANITE.
GRANITE IS THE MOST
COMMON FORM OF
INTRUSIVE IGNEOUS ROCK.
THE YOSEMITE AREA OF THE
SIERRA NEVADA IS MOSTLY
ALL GRANITE, FORMED DEEP
WITHIN THE EARTH AND THEN
EXPOSED LATER BY SURFACE
PROCESSES LIKE EROSION.
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS OFTEN
START AS FRAGMENTS OF
EXISTING ROCKS ON THE
SURFACE OF THE EARTH.
WHAT HAPPENS ON THE
SURFACE IS IT'S EXPOSED
TO THE ELEMENTS -
EXPOSED TO WATER
AND ALL THE STUFF
THAT'S IN WATER,
IT'S EXPOSED TO ALL
THESE CHEMICALS AND AIR
AND EVENTUALLY IT
ERODES, IT WEATHERS.
SO THE ROCK BREAKS DOWN,
ITS MINERALS BREAK DOWN,
AND EVENTUALLY IT GETS
TRANSPORTED BY WATER
TO SOMEWHERE ELSE.
SO ALL THAT STUFF
YOU SEE IN STREAMS
AND OCEANS AND LAKES
- THE SAND, THE CLAY -
THOSE ARE BITS OF
BROKEN DOWN ROCK.
THESE ROCK FRAGMENTS CALLED
"SEDIMENT" ARE EVENTUALLY
DEPOSITED IN LAKES,
VALLEYS, SEAS, AND OCEANS.
WHEN BURIED, THE SEDIMENTS
LOSE WATER AND ARE
ESSENTIALLY GLUED
BACK TOGETHER.
YOU CAN'T TALK ABOUT A
SEDIMENTARY ROCK WITHOUT
TALKING ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENT IT FORMED IT.
WAS IT AN OCEAN?
WAS IT A LAKE?
WAS IT A RIVER?
WAS IT A DESERT?
WAS IT, YOU KNOW, YOU
CAN'T DISCUSS IT WITHOUT
REALLY HAVING A GOOD
IDEA OF ALL THE ELEMENTS
THAT CAME INTO PLAY
IN ITS FORMATION.
THEY'RE ALL FORMED IN A
PARTICULAR ENVIRONMENT -
A LAKE, A SHALLOW MARINE
SETTING NEAR A BEACH,
OR IN A STREAM.
AND ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT PARTS ABOUT
STUDYING SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
OF ANCIENT EARTH IS THAT
THEY CAN TELL US A GREAT
DEAL ABOUT WHAT THE EARTH
LOOKED LIKE AT THAT
PARTICULAR TIME
BY UNDERSTANDING WHAT
THE ENVIRONMENT WAS.
WAS IT A SWAMP?
WAS IT A LAKE?
WAS IT A STREAM?
IN THE SEDIMENTARY
ROCK FAMILY
THERE ARE TWO
MAIN SUBGROUPS.
THERE ARE DETRITAL
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
AND CHEMICAL
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS.
DETRITAL SEDIMENTARY
ROCKS ARE FORMED FROM THE
LEFTOVER FRAGMENTS,
DETRITUS, OF OTHER ROCKS.
THERE'S MUDSTONE,
THERE'S SANDSTONE.
THOSE NAMES COME FROM
THE SIZE OF THE CLASS
OF A ROCK.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
DETRITAL SEDIMENTARY
ROCK CONGLOMERATE
ARE MADE OF FRAGMENTS
THAT ARE TWO MILLIMETERS
OR GREATER IN SIZE.
SAND ARE FRAGMENTS THAT
RANGE IN SIZE BETWEEN
ONE-SIXTEENTH AND ABOUT
TWO MILLIMETERS IN SIZE.
SILT RANGES IN SIZE
FROM ABOUT 1/16TH TO
1/256THS OF A MILLIMETER,
AND CLAYS ARE REALLY TINY.
THAT'S ANYTHING LESS
THAN ABOUT 1/256THS
OF A MILLIMETER.
SO DETRITAL SEDIMENTARY
ROCKS ARE BASED
AND CLASSIFIED
BY GRAIN SIZE.
THE OTHER THING TO REMEMBER
ABOUT SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
IS THAT THERE'S A
PART OF THEM WHICH IS
NOT FORMED BY
THE DETRITUS,
THE ERODED MATERIAL
OF OTHER ROCKS, BUT
ARE FORMED BY BIOCHEMICAL
AND CHEMICAL MEANS.
AND THESE ARE VERY
IMPORTANT SETS OF ROCKS,
ESPECIALLY OUR CARBONATES,
OUR LIMESTONES,
AND MOST OF
THOSE ARE FORMED
INDIRECTLY OR
DIRECTLY FROM LIFE,
FROM THE HARD PARTS OF
VARIOUS FORMS OF LIFE.
FROM SHELLS ON THE BEACH
TO VARIOUS KINDS OF PLANTS
THAT HAVE ESSENTIALLY SPINES
OF HARD SKELETAL PARTS,
TO BONES FROM VERTEBRATES
AND ANY OF THOSE THINGS
THAT ACCUMULATE IN LAYERS
OR ARE MIXED WITH DETRITUS
GIVE US A KIND OF
SEDIMENTARY ROCK THAT
IS FORMED FUNDAMENTALLY
BY BIOLOGICAL REMAINS.
AND USUALLY IT'S THE
MINERAL COMPOSITION
WHICH WILL IDENTIFY IT.
FOR EXAMPLE,
CALCIUM CARBONATE.
ROCKS MADE OF THIS
PARTICULAR MINERAL
ARE USUALLY
CALLED LIMESTONE.
ROCKS MADE OF THE
MINERAL HALIDE,
WHICH IS
COMMON TABLE SALT,
ARE WHAT ARE
CALLED "EVAPORATES"
AND BECAUSE THEY'RE MADE
CHEMICALLY THEY FALL UNDER
THE SUBGROUP OF CHEMICAL
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS.
METAMORPHIC ROCKS
ARE ALSO FORMED BY
THE MODIFICATION OF
A PRE-EXISTING ROCK,
BUT THIS TIME BY HEAT
AND PRESSURE ON THE ROCK.
IF WE TAKE THAT ROCK NOW
AND WE BURY IT VERY DEEPLY,
MAYBE WE TAKE IT
DOWN A SUBDUCTION ZONE
OR WE SLAM TWO CONTINENTS
INTO EACH OTHER
AND WE BURY THE ROCKS
AND HEAT THEM UP -
THIS IS THE PROCESS THAT
FORMS METAMORPHIC ROCKS.
THOSE PRESSURES AND
TEMPERATURES EVENTUALLY,
IF THEY'RE DEEP ENOUGH IN
THE EARTH, CAUSE THE ROCK
TO CHANGE AGAIN - CAUSES
THE CHEMISTRY TO WANT TO
REARRANGE ITSELF
TO ACCOMMODATE
THOSE TEMPERATURES
AND PRESSURES.
AND THAT'S WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN THE MINERALS
ARE PUSHED UPON, BASICALLY.
LITERALLY JUST PRESSURE
PUSHES UPON THEM UNTIL
THEY ROTATE IN A
PREFERRED DIRECTION.
THIS PROCESS CAUSES MANY
CHANGES IN THE ROCK,
INCLUDING A
CHANGE IN DENSITY;
GROWTH OF
LARGER CRYSTALS;
AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF
LOW TEMPERATURE MINERALS
INTO HIGH
TEMPERATURE MINERALS.
THESE METAMORPHIC
ROCKS ARE THEN DIVIDED
INTO TWO GROUPS:
FOLIATED AND NON-FOLIATED.
SO METAMORPHIC ROCKS ACTUALLY
GO THROUGH GRADATIONS
DEPENDING ON THE TYPE
OF METAMORPHIC ROCK.
FOLIATED METAMORPHIC ROCKS
WHICH USUALLY START OUT AS
A CLAY-RICH SHALE WILL GO
FROM LOW GRADE TO HIGH GRADE.
AN EXAMPLE OF A LOW-GRADE
METAMORPHIC ROCK
WOULD BE SLATE.
JUST LIKE YOU'D GO
DOWN AND BUY SLATE TILE
AT THE HARDWARE STORE AND
TILE YOUR FLOOR WITH IT.
NON-FOLIATED METAMORPHIC
ROCKS INCLUDE THINGS
LIKE MARBLE.
IF YOU TAKE THE CHEMICAL
SEDIMENTARY ROCK LIMESTONE
AND SUBJECT THAT TO
HEAT AND PRESSURE,
YOU'LL FORM MARBLE WHICH
MOST PEOPLE KNOW IS A ROCK
USED IN ARCHITECTURAL
OR ARTISTIC ENTERPRISES.
ROCKS ON THE EARTH'S
SURFACE VARY IN AGE FROM
LESS THAN ONE MILLION YEARS
OLD TO OVER THREE BILLION.
BUT ALL ARE MUCH
YOUNGER THAN THE
4.6 BILLION
YEAR OLD EARTH.
THE REASON ROCKS ARE
YOUNGER THAN THE EARTH
IS BECAUSE THEY
ARE RECYCLED.
FROM IGNEOUS TO
SEDIMENTARY TO METAMORPHIC
AND BACK AGAIN, THE
EARTH'S ROCKS AND MINERALS
CHANGE OVER AND OVER IN
DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS
IN WHAT WE CALL
"THE ROCK CYCLE".
THE ROCK CYCLE IS A
REPRESENTATION OF
HOW DYNAMIC THE
EARTH IS, REALLY.
ROCKS ARE IN A CONSTANT
STATE OF CHANGE,
A CONSTANT
STATE OF FLUX.
SO THIS IGNEOUS ROCK
WAS ON THE SURFACE,
IT GETS BROKEN
DOWN INTO SEDIMENT,
SEDIMENT GETS WASHED
INTO AN OCEAN OR LAKE
AND THERE IT FORMS
SEDIMENTARY ROCK
AND THEN IT GETS
METAMORPHOSED AND THEN
IF IT'S BURIED DEEP ENOUGH
IT GETS TURNED BACK
INTO MAGMA AND THEN
IT COMES BACK AGAIN.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE REFER
TO AS THE "ROCK CYCLE".
SO THESE SAME ELEMENTS,
THESE SAME OXYGENS
AND SILICAS AND CARBONS
GET PUT INTO THIS CYCLE
AND GET REFORMED AND PUT
BACK IN AND REFORMED.
TO US AS HUMANS WE THINK
ROCKS ARE IMMUTABLE.
THEY'RE NOT
GOING ANYWHERE.
THEY'RE HERE FOREVER.
BUT INDEED ROCKS
ARE ALWAYS CHANGING.
ROCKS ARE ERODING TO
BECOME SEDIMENTARY ROCKS,
OR ROCKS ARE BEING HEATED
AND CHANGED TO BECOME
METAMORPHIC ROCKS, OR
ROCKS ARE BEING MELTED
AND RECRYSTALLIZED TO
BECOME IGNEOUS ROCKS.
THE ROCK CYCLE IS A
REPRESENTATION OF THIS
DYNAMIC NATURE, OF
EARTH'S DYNAMIC NATURE.
THE EARTH'S CRUST IS
VERY THIN COMPARED TO
THE REST OF THE EARTH
BUT IT CONTAINS THE ROCKS
AND MINERALS PROVIDING
US INVALUABLE RESOURCES
FOR ECONOMY, RECREATION,
AND INFORMATION
ABOUT THE INTRICATE HISTORY
OF OUR PLANET EARTH.
*